Welcome back.
We've talked about these five sorting algorithms and by now you should know that Merse sort and quick
sort although they're harder to implement are the most often used algorithms in real life because they
use divide and conquer to get us this oh of an Lagann performance boost.
But can't we beat Oh of and log and.
And here's the thing.
Mathematically it is impossible to improve on this.
If anybody comes up with an algorithm that is faster than this they're going to well they're going to
be very very rich.
Mathematically it's impossible because all of and Lagann means that we have to sort by comparison all
of these sorting algorithms have to compare every number to each other.
But there is one exception to this rule.
You can improve this if you don't make comparisons.
Huh.
What does that mean.
There's a small section of inputs that we can actually beat off of and log and and these are called
non comparison sorts and you'll most likely see counting sort and radix sort.
But what does that mean counting sort in radix sort is an entire different way to think about sorting.
With comparison sort we decided the order of the numbers based on asking the question hey is this aliment
bigger than the one over there.
What about the one over there over there.
And we just kept doing that every number got compared to each other non comparison sorting does it a
little bit differently.
We're going to use the way that numbers and data is stored on our computers in zeros and ones and take
advantage of that fact to sort things.
Now this can get pretty complex.
And as you can see here in this paper just looking at the diagrams and for example radix sort here in
how we store numbers in zeros and ones we can use this knowledge to actually sort some things.
I'm going to leave resources for you if you want to get really technical and into this topic.
I do warn you you can get a little bit mathy but the one thing to note here is that these type of sorting
algorithm counting sort and radix sort only work with numbers specifically integers in a restricted
range.
So if you have only numbers that you want to solve sort and the range of those numbers go from let's
say zero to 100 that is a small range then you would use something like this to make things really fast
but it wouldn't work on any type of data.
It only really works on numbers because of the way numbers are stored in memory.
You see I like something like merge sort or quicksort that are universal.
That is they can sort any type of data things like counting sort and radix sort is only useful for fixed
length integers.
But they are able to beat the speed of all when log in.
And as you can see here bucket's sort radix sort cunning sort in their average cases have all of and
plus K of and K of and k what and k means is beyond the scope of this course.
And some argue that in the end this actually still turns out to be pretty slow.
I'll leave resources for you like I said.
So you can read up on them but the only thing you need to know about this is that sometimes if you have
numbers that are within a certain range it could be faster than quicksort or Murcer.
So now that we know this let's do some interview exercises based on sorting to solidify what we just
learned.